---
bibliography:
- 'domesticabuse\_refs.bib'
title: Understanding domestic abuse
---

Objectives
==========

*List the main objectives of the proposed research \[up to 4000 chars\]*

Who are the people most vulnerable to becoming victims of domestic
abuse? To what extent do neighbourhood characteristics predict the
prevalence of domestic abuse? What predicts serious harm and victims'
decision to finally report the abuse? What is the quantifiable,
long-term impact of domestic abuse victimisation or witnessing domestic
abuse as a child on socio-economic and health outcomes in later life?
How do changes in alcohol consumption and financial stability affect the
prevalence of domestic abuse? In this research project, we will address
these questions using a wide range of quantitative approaches and
various data sources.

We have 4 core objectives.

1\) To conduct the first large-scale, quantitative exploration of the
individual- and neighbourhood-level risk factors of domestic abuse
victimisation in England and Wales. By validating insights from
previous, mostly qualitative investigations, we will provide a deeper
understanding of the socio-economic factors and their interactions in
perpetuating domestic abuse in England and Wales. While we will only use
UK-specific data, insights from these analyses are likely to be
applicable to non-UK contexts.

2\) To improve our understanding of the economic costs of domestic abuse,
by quantifying the causal effect of victimisation on a variety of
socio-economic outcomes. Current cost estimates by the government do not
take into account how educational attainment, income and employment
status of victims are affected by victimisation and witnessing abuse as
a child [@costs]. We will improve the precision of this calculation with
the first, comprehensive UK-based exploration of the long-term effects
of domestic abuse victimisation.

3\) To translate our research into impact by delivering applicable
insights for the relevant agencies, including the police and
policy-makers. Our research will provide the police with important
information to facilitate the optimal geographical and temporal
allocation of resources and improvement of crime recording practices. In
addition, these insights will also help the government to design more
effective intervention campaigns to protect victims and will be of
interest to a wide range of academics.

4\) To exploit the rich information contained in the Crime Survey for
England and Wales (CSEW) to explore the predictors and consequences of
domestic abuse victimisation. Despite the rich, detailed information
contained in the CSEW about respondents, we are not aware of any
non-exploratory study using the CSEW to understand the predictors and
consequences of domestic abuse victimisation in England and Wales. We
aim to take full advantage of the wealth of information in the CSEW in
understanding domestic abuse.

Summary
=======

*Describe the proposed research in simple terms in a way that could be
publicised to a general audience \[up to 4000 chars\]*

Concern about domestic abuse is widespread, and it is rightly identified
as a serious societal issue affecting the lives of people from all walks
of life. However, the true extent of the problem is still often
underestimated, and hard to comprehend: 2 million adults in England and
Wales (7.9% of women and 4.2% of men) reported to have experienced some
form of domestic abuse in the year ending 2018 March [@ONS], and 41% of
all women murdered in England and Wales in this period were victims of
domestic homicide. The long-lasting, damaging effects of domestic abuse
are not limited to the direct target of abuse, but it also has serious
developmental implications for children witnessing the abuse.
Illustrating the extent of the societal harm caused by domestic abuse,
the economic cost of domestic abuse in England and Wales was estimated
to be as high as Â£66 billion in the year ending March, 2017 [@costs].

Despite the extent and severity of the problem, there is relatively
little academic research focusing on domestic abuse in the context of
the UK, perhaps due to the lack of reliable data sources. Using police
data to understand domestic abuse is problematic due to the vast levels
of underreporting, while insights from qualitative approaches are hard
to generalise. In the UK, the most reliable source of data on domestic
abuse is the Crime Survey for England and Wales (CSEW), an annual,
cross-sectional representative survey collecting information on
socio-economic characteristics as well as experiences of domestic abuse
[@OfficeforNationalStatistics2019]. While the Office for National
Statistics (ONS) regularly publishes findings from the CSEW, these are
mostly exploratory and descriptive in nature. Despite the rich
information provided by this survey, only a limited number of studies
have utilised the CSEW to explore the predictors of domestic abuse
victimisation in England and Wales (e.g., ).

Our project fills this gap in our current understanding of domestic
abuse, by taking advantage of the wealth of information contained in the
CSEW, and drawing on other data sources to complement the findings.
Applying sophisticated statistical techniques tailored to each analysis
(including regression, random forest, and propensity score matching), we
will identify the individual and neighbourhood-level predictors of
domestic abuse victimisation, and the factors affecting victims'
willingness to contact the police. We will also explore whether police
mis-recording of domestic abuse-related crimes disproportionately
affects certain victim groups. Furthermore, we will quantify the short-
and long-term causal effects of witnessing domestic abuse on behavioural
outcomes in young adulthood (with particular focus on the propensity to
engage in violent criminal behaviours) and socio-economic and
health-related outcomes in later life. Finally, we will explore how
alcohol consumption, spending on gambling, and changes in benefit
receipts affect the prevalence of domestic abuse.

Our work will primarily have implications for the police and
policy-makers. For example, insights about the predictors of serious
harm can inform the police protocol aiming to prevent domestic
homicides, while understanding the extent to which crime mis-recording
depends on victim characteristics will help the police to understand the
causes of mis-recording and improve their practices. Policy-makers will
be able to design more effective awareness campaigns using information
on the geographical and temporal characteristics of domestic abuse
victimisation, reporting behaviour, the extent to which gambling and
alcohol spending affects it, and better understand its far-reaching
societal implications, with particular focus on the effect of domestic
abuse victimisation on propensity to violence in young adulthood, and
socio-economic outcomes in later life.

Academic Beneficiaries
======================

*Describe who will benefit from the research \[up to 4000 chars\].*

Owing to the wide variety of questions we aim to answer, and the diverse
methodological approaches we plan to employ in addressing these
questions, our research will deliver insights relevant to researchers
across various social science disciplines, including psychology,
behavioural science, criminology and health economics.

Psychologists working on understanding the risk factors of domestic
abuse victimisation will benefit from the first comprehensive,
quantitative UK-based investigation of the individual and environmental
predictors of domestic abuse victimisation. Previous investigations
focusing on domestic abuse in the context of the UK have either
exclusively relied on police records or used a small-sample, qualitative
approach. By drawing on multiple data sources, including police crime
data and the CSEW, we can combine their strengths to validate previous
findings and deliver new insights stimulating future research efforts.

Behavioural researchers will benefit from our work exploring how
exogenous, time-varying factors affect the willingness to report, and
the causal effect of alcohol consumption and financial shocks on the
prevalence of domestic abuse. These insights will be particularly
important for behavioural researchers working for Behavioural Insights
Teams and the UK government, owing to their policy-relevant nature.

Criminologists working on exploring the experiences of domestic abuse
survivors in the Criminal Justice System will benefit from our research
examining whether police mis-recording disproportionately affects
certain victim groups, and its implications for victim's trust in the
CJS.

Health economists will be interested in our work on how direct or
indirect domestic abuse victimisation affects socio-economic outcomes
and physical and mental well-being in later life. These estimates will
help us improve the precision of the estimated cost of domestic abuse in
the UK.

Staff Duties
============

*Summarise the roles and responsibilities of each post for which funding
is sought \[up to 2000 characters\]*

As PI, Mullett will be responsible for coordinating the research. He
will also act as the data controller for this project. Mullett has
attained level three vetting with West Midlands Police, allowing him
more comprehensive access to original police records, and he has the
appropriate experience coordinating large datasets within projects. He
will act as supervisor to the early career researcher Anna Trendl,
ensuring that she can continue to build upon the research capabilities
she has already developed during her PhD. As a member of the Centre for
Operational Policing Research (COPR), he will, in tandem with Prof Neil
Stewart, liaise with West Midlands Police to ensure that the results are
communicated back in the most effective and interpretable manner. This
will maximise the impact that this research produces. Mullett will
contribute extensively to the research design and writing academic
papers.

As Co-I, Stewart's responsibilities will be to aid in coordinating the
research program. He will also meet regularly with the early career
researcher Anna Trendl, providing insights and support---Stewart has
extensive experience supervising postdoctoral researchers. A major role
will also be to coordinate the communication of the results within the
broader context of the Centre for Operational Policing Research (COPR)
activities. This coordination, and the possibility for links and
collaboration with other COPR members or projects will provide unique
added value to the research. Stewart will contribute to the research
design and writing academic papers.

As Post-Doctoral researcher, Trendl will be responsible for performing
the analyses upon the data, and, as is the norm in psychology, leading
the writing of the resulting papers. She will also be deeply involved
with impact related activity. As an early career researcher, it is
crucial that she be given the opportunity to expand her network, and
attain these new skills. The demands of this project mean it is
essential that this is a postdoctoral role, and that the individual has
a strong track record in statistical analysis. Trendl already has
extensive experience with the WMP records.

Impact Summary 
===============

*(please refer to the help for guidance on what to consider when
completing this section) \[up to 4000 chars\]*

In 2018, there were almost 2 million victims of domestic abuse in
England and Wales alone. Domestic abuse has a terrible impact upon
victims in a variety of ways, and ultimately, the fundamental goal of
this research project is to benefit victims of domestic abuse by
improving their safety and access to support. However, the effects of
domestic abuse are multi-faceted and far reaching. Such abuse often
touches the lives of those far beyond the initial victim, such as
children, family, neighbours, friends, and colleagues.

This research uses a variety of existing data sets, to help us better
understand the patterns, characteristics, and consequences of domestic
abuse victimisation. The research will help to identify underlying risk
factors for potential domestic abuse victims, and indicators for the
most violent domestic abuse incidents, such as domestic homicide. We
will engage with a number of stakeholders (police, domestic abuse
charities, national and local government), and provide insights relevant
to their specific role in reducing the prevalence and harm caused by
domestic abuse.

Many of our primary partners are within the police force. Our insights
about police mis-recording of domestic abuse will help the police
improve their recording practices, enhancing victim's trust in the
police, and increase willingness to report future incidents.

In addition, the research will help the police to identify individuals
who are most at risk of being victims of domestic abuse, and improve
risk assessment models to identify situations which could escalate into
serious acts of violence. It will also enable the identification of
likely triggers for the onset, or worsening of ongoing abuse allowing
police to better direct resources and design risk assessment frameworks.
The potential triggers that we will investigate include high profile
events such as sporting tournaments, and economic shocks, such as
changes to the structure of benefit payments. Not only will this help
the police, but it will also help policy makers estimate the likely
impacts of policy change.

The police will also benefit from a deeper understanding of the factors
governing reporting behaviour, and its temporal characteristics
throughout the year, and this knowledge will allow them to improve the
allocation of scarce police resources.

For domestic abuse charities and the government, insights from our
research regarding the geographical and temporal characteristics of
domestic abuse victimisation will provide invaluable information for the
most effective targeting of domestic abuse awareness campaigns.

Ethical Information
===================

*Please explain what, if any, ethical issues you believe are relevant to
the proposed research project, and which ethical approvals have been
obtained, or will be sought if the project is funded? If you believe
that an ethics review is not necessary, please explain your view
(available: 4000 characters)*

The primary ethical concerns in this project centre around data privacy
and data security. In particular, the West Midlands Police datasets are
highly sensitive. If data were to end up in the wrong hands could be
particularly damaging for the individuals present in the data, as well
as for the WMP force, and even the researchers. For this reason we have
developed our data security approach in tandem with WMP to ensure that
data is only ever held and transported securely, and that researchers
hold only the minimum amount of information in order to perform the
research.

We will never link individuals across datasets, and our lab data plan is
fully compliant with GDPR.

As this research only involves secondary data analysis, concerns about
possible harms during data collection are not relevant. However, in
presenting the results, care will be taken to respect individuals who
have been victims.

One potential concern is the possibility of consuming police resources
that are needed elsewhere. This is an ever present consideration within
the Centre for Operational Policing Research. WMP have already outputted
their data, and we have applied data cleaning to it ourselves.
Therefore, we will make very minimal requests on police resources. Our
primary cost upon staff time will be during feeding back our results to
influence police operations and policy. There are structures within the
police force specifically designed for this, so by presenting our
findings to those, we will actually increase WMP efficiency.

Approval for this secondary data analysis will be attained from the
University of Warwick's Humanities and Social Science Research Ethics
Committee (HSSREC), as it has been for our previous work using WMP and
other large datasets.

Attachments
===========

[Instructions for
attachments](https://je-s.rcuk.ac.uk/Handbook/Index.htm#pages/GuidanceonCompletingaStandardG/CaseforSupportandAttachments/ESRCSpecificRequirements.htm)

\* Case for support (6 page limit, 11 points, A4, 1\" margins)

\* References

\* Pathways to Impact (2 sides of A4)

\* Justification of Resources (2 sides of A4)

\* Letter of support from WMP

\* Data management plan (modify from [lab
plan](https://github.com/neil-stewart/data_management_plan)

\* Accumulating to choose progress report

\* NIBS2 progress report
